Al ARA Damon is a founder of inara an
international Network for Aid relief and
assistance she joins us now live from
Istanbul good to have you with us so
first of all ARA take us through the
broad range of threat to life facing
gazan children right now from air
strikes on their homes to dangerous
tracks across the the Gaza Strip from
place to
place well you have what you mentioned
right there and of course what was just
highlighted in that report there's the
physical danger coming from the bombs
the gunshots uh to children but then
there's also the very real fact that
illnesses that normally would not kill
children are at risk of doing so under
the conditions that children are now
being forced to live in in Gaza in these
overcrowded unsanitary shelters
something like a kid having diarrhea
normally that's not deadly but it can be
if that diarrhea is not properly treated
and if that child ends up being
dehydrated plus and anyone with a kid
can probably relate to this you know a
kid with diarrhea has accidents you need
to be able to clean off that child you
need to be able to have a clean diaper
to put them in that obviously doesn't
exist in Gaza you have uh skin diseases
like scabies and lights that are just
spreading you have acute pulmonary
infections like the common cold of
course not deadly but it can become
deadly you have cases of pneumonia and
bronchitis that arising you have uh for
example the growing risk of hypothermia
what happens when children as
malnourished as the children in Gaza are
now today given that the vast majority
of families barely subside on one meal a
day is that hypothermia can begin to set
in at much warmer temperatures and then
of course on top of all of this you have
the various different mental traumas
that are happening to children on a more
than daily
basis so from the rate of Killing
Children which is now in two months
greater than two years of conflict in
Ukraine to the wide range of things you
just mentioned hypothermia diarrhea
you've got to ask has this killing rate
of children does it have any parallel
that you've
seen no no and look I was a
correspondent with CNN for 20 years I've
been covering War for 20 years I have
not seen this I have not even seen
anything that is comparable to this it's
not just about the intensity of the
bombardment in such a small space it's
also about the fact that I've never been
to a war zone where families once they
manag to survive the bombardment are
somehow unable to flee the actual danger
zone I've never been to a space where
humanitarian Aid is ready it's ready to
move in it's ready to be deployed the
supplies are there but there is
absolutely no way to access the civilian
population um that is so desperately in
need this is unprecedented it's not even
just you know myself journalists and Aid
workers who have been in this space for
well over my own 20 years have also said
that they've never seen anything quite
like this and there's no formula for how
to deal with
this well in addition to the threat to
life for those kids who do manage to
survive the bombing the lack of food the
spread of disease what sort of long-term
treatment
rehabilitative work do some of these
kids need who's who just
survive look it's going to be very
extensive Dr rassan abusa Who is one of
my charity in's founding members was in
Gaza for six weeks and from what he saw
on the ground volunteering as a
reconstructive surgeon the vast majority
of injuries that he saw among children
are going to need years and years of
surgery plus all sorts of different
kinds of physical therapy and life
adjustments then you need to think about
the mental tool that all of this is
taking one needs to bear in mind that
even before before October 7th back in
2022 save the children did a report uh
where they surveyed the children of Gaza
and they found that 80% of children in
Gaza suffered from depression anxiety
and fear add to that add to the all that
trauma and the trauma of the war's past
what children are going through right
now you have the trauma of the fear that
happens every single time there's an
explosion every single time a gunshot
crackles and this happens more than once
per day you have the fear of whatever it
is that cause the injury If the child is
injured and in pain you have fear
because fear is what is created when a
child turns to their parent and their
parent cannot ease their pain and cannot
ease their own fear all of these are
different kinds of traumas that are
continuously bombarding a child's Psyche
on a daily level this is going to have
to be
extremely aggressively cautiously and
carefully addressed at whatever point in
time it is that my organization and
others are going to be able to begin to
address this compounded multi-layer
trauma amongst children when this sort
of trauma goes unaddressed it calcifies
within a person uh so to speak and that
person becomes incapable that child
becomes incapable of functioning this
level of daily fear and daily trauma is
enough to cause an adult to mentally
snap it is going to have a severe and
devastating impact on
children thank you for sharing your
perspective and experience on
this